# 6. Finite Fields（有限域）

Now that we have developed the machinery of Galois theory, we apply it in this chapter to study special classes of field extensions. Sections 9 and 11 are good examples of how we can use group theoretic information to obtain results in field theory. Section 10 has a somewhat different flavor than the other sections. In it, we look into the classical proof of the Hilbert Theorem 90, a result originally used to help describe cyclic extensions, and from that proof we are led to the study of cohomology, a key tool in algebraic topology, algebraic geometry, and the theory of division rings.

In this section, we study finite fields and, more generally, finite extensions of finite fields.

Let $F$ be a finite field, and say $\mathrm{char}(F) = p$. We can view $F$ as an extension field of $\mathbb{F}_p$. Since $F$ is finite, $F$ is a finite dimensional $\mathbb{F}_p$-vector space. If $[F : \mathbb{F}_p] = n$, then $F$ and $\mathbb{F}_p^n$ are isomorphic as $\mathbb{F}_p$-vector spaces, so $|F| = p^n$. We will first obtain some field theoretic information about $F$ by investigating the group structure of the multiplicative group $F^*$. For the next lemma, recall that if $G$ is an Abelian group, then the *exponent* $\exp(G)$ of $G$ is the least common multiple of elements in $G$. By a group theory exercise, there is an element of $G$ whose order is $\exp(G)$. From this fact, it follows that $G$ is cyclic if and only if $|G| = \exp(G)$. These facts are proven in Proposition 1.4 of Appendix C.

**Lemma 6.1.** If $K$ is a field and $G$ is a finite subgroup of $K^*$, then $G$ is cyclic.

**Proof.** Let $n = |G|$ and $m = \exp(G)$. Then $m$ divides $n$ by Lagrange's theorem. If $g \in G$, then $g^m = 1$, so each element of $G$ is a root of the polynomial $x^m - 1$. This polynomial has at most $m$ roots in the field $K$. However, $x^m - 1$ has at least the elements of $G$ as roots, so $n \leq m$. Therefore, $\exp(G) = |G|$, so $G$ is cyclic. □

**Corollary 6.2.** If $F$ is a finite field, then $F^*$ is cyclic.

**Example 6.3.** Let $F = \mathbb{F}_p$. A generator for $F^*$ is often called a *primitive root modulo* $p$. For example, $2$ is a primitive root modulo $5$. Moreover, $2$ is not a primitive root modulo $7$, while $3$ is a primitive root modulo $7$. In general, it is not easy to find a primitive root modulo $p$, and there is no simple way to find a primitive root in terms of $p$.

In Section 5, the primitive element theorem was stated for arbitrary base fields but was proved only for infinite fields. If $K/F$ is an extension of finite fields, then there are finitely many intermediate fields. Therefore, the hypotheses of the primitive element theorem hold for $K/F$. The following corollary finishes the proof of the primitive element theorem.

**Corollary 6.4.** If $K/F$ is an extension of finite fields, then $K$ is a simple extension of $F$.

**Proof.** By the previous corollary, the group $K^*$ is cyclic. Let $\alpha$ be a generator of the cyclic group $K^*$. Every nonzero element of $K$ is a power of $\alpha$, so $K = F(\alpha)$. Therefore, $K$ is a simple extension of $F$. □

The following theorem exploits group theoretic properties of finite groups to give the main structure theorem of finite fields.

**Theorem 6.5.** Let $F$ be a finite field with $\mathrm{char}(F) = p$, and set $|F| = p^n$. Then $F$ is the splitting field of the separable polynomial $x^{p^n} - x$ over $\mathbb{F}_p$. Thus, $F/\mathbb{F}_p$ is Galois. Furthermore, if $\sigma$ is defined on $F$ by $\sigma(a) = a^p$, then $\sigma$ generates the Galois group $\mathrm{Gal}(F/\mathbb{F}_p)$, so this Galois group is cyclic.

**Proof.** Let $|F| = p^n$, so $|F^*| = p^n - 1$. By Lagrange's theorem, if $a \in F^*$, then $a^{p^n - 1} = 1$. Multiplying by $a$ gives $a^{p^n} = a$. This equation also holds for $a = 0$. Therefore, the elements of $F$ are roots of the polynomial $x^{p^n} - x$. However, this polynomial has at most $p^n$ roots, so the elements of $F$ are precisely the roots of $x^{p^n} - x$. This proves that $F$ is the splitting field over $\mathbb{F}_p$ of $x^{p^n} - x$, and so $F$ is normal over $\mathbb{F}_p$. Moreover, the derivative test shows that $x^{p^n} - x$ has no repeated roots, so $x^{p^n} - x$ is separable over $\mathbb{F}_p$. Thus, $F$ is Galois over $\mathbb{F}_p$.

Define $\sigma : F \to F$ by $\sigma(a) = a^p$. An easy computation shows that $\sigma$ is an $\mathbb{F}_p$-homomorphism, and $\sigma$ is surjective since $F$ is finite. Hence, $\sigma$ is an $\mathbb{F}_p$-automorphism of $F$. The fixed field of $\sigma$ is $\{a \in F : a^p = a\} \supseteq \mathbb{F}_p$. Each element in $\mathcal{F}(\sigma)$ is a root of $x^p - x$, so there are at most $p$ elements in $\mathcal{F}(\sigma)$. This proves that $\mathbb{F}_p = \mathcal{F}(\sigma)$, so $\mathrm{Gal}(F/\mathbb{F}_p)$ is the cyclic group generated by $\sigma$. □

The automorphism $\sigma$ defined above is called the *Frobenius automorphism* of $F$.

**Corollary 6.6.** Any two finite fields of the same size are isomorphic.

**Proof.** The proof of Theorem 6.5 shows that any two fields of order $p^n$ are splitting fields over $\mathbb{F}_p$ of $x^{p^n} - x$, so the corollary follows from the isomorphic extension theorem. □

We can use Theorem 6.5 to describe any finite extension of finite fields, not only extensions of $\mathbb{F}_p$.

**Corollary 6.7.** If $K/F$ is an extension of finite fields, then $K/F$ is Galois with a cyclic Galois group. Moreover, if $\mathrm{char}(F) = p$ and $|F| = p^n$, then $\mathrm{Gal}(K/F)$ is generated by the automorphism $\tau$ defined by $\tau(a) = a^{p^n}$.

**Proof.** Say $[K : \mathbb{F}_p] = m$. Then $\mathrm{Gal}(K/\mathbb{F}_p)$ is a cyclic group of order $m$ by Theorem 6.5, so the order of the Frobenius automorphism $\sigma$ of $K$ is $m$. The group $\mathrm{Gal}(K/F)$ is a subgroup of $\mathrm{Gal}(K/\mathbb{F}_p)$, so it is also cyclic. If $s = |\mathrm{Gal}(K/F)|$ and $m = ns$, then a generator of $\mathrm{Gal}(K/F)$ is $\sigma^n$. By induction, we see that the function $\sigma^n$ is given by $\sigma^n(a) = a^{p^n}$. Also, since $s = [K : F]$, we have that $n = [F : \mathbb{F}_p]$, so $|F| = p^n$. □

We have described finite fields as extensions of $\mathbb{F}_p$ and have shown that any finite extension of $\mathbb{F}_p$ has $p^n$ elements for some $n$. However, we have not yet determined for which $n$ there is a field with $p^n$ elements. Using the fundamental theorem along with the description of finite fields as splitting fields in Theorem 6.5, we now show that for each $n$ there is a unique up to isomorphism field with $p^n$ elements.

**Theorem 6.8.** Let $N$ be an algebraic closure of $\mathbb{F}_p$. For any positive integer $n$, there is a unique subfield of $N$ of order $p^n$. If $K$ and $L$ are subfields of $N$ of orders $p^m$ and $p^n$, respectively, then $K \subseteq L$ if and only if $m$ divides $n$. When this occurs, $L$ is Galois over $K$ with Galois group generated by $\tau$, where $\tau(a) = a^{p^m}$.

**Proof.** Let $n$ be a positive integer. The set of roots in $N$ of the polynomial $x^{p^n} - x$ has $p^n$ elements and is a field. Thus, there is a subfield of $N$ of order $p^n$. Since any two fields of order $p^n$ in $N$ are splitting fields of $x^{p^n} - x$ over $\mathbb{F}_p$ by Theorem 6.5, any subfield of $N$ of order $p^n$ consists exactly of the roots of $x^{p^n} - x$. Therefore, there is a unique subfield of $N$ of order $p^n$.

Let $K$ and $L$ be subfields of $N$, of orders $p^m$ and $p^n$, respectively. First, suppose that $K \subseteq L$. Then

$$
\begin{aligned}
n &= [L : \mathbb{F}_p] = [L : K] \cdot [K : \mathbb{F}_p] \\
&= m[L : K],
\end{aligned}
$$

so $m$ divides $n$. Conversely, suppose that $m$ divides $n$. Each element $a$ of $K$ satisfies $a^{p^m} = a$. Since $m$ divides $n$, each $a$ also satisfies $a^{p^n} = a$, so $a \in L$. This proves that $K \subseteq L$. When this happens $L$ is Galois over $K$ by Corollary 6.7. That corollary also shows that $\mathrm{Gal}(L/K)$ is generated by $\tau$, where $\tau$ is defined by $\tau(a) = a^{|K|}$. □

If $F$ is a finite field and $f(x) \in F[x]$, then Theorems 6.5 and 6.8 can be used to determine the splitting field over $F$ of the polynomial $f$.

**Corollary 6.9.** Let $F$ be a finite field, and let $f(x)$ be a monic irreducible polynomial over $F$ of degree $n$.

1. If $a$ is a root of $f$ in some extension field of $F$, then $F(a)$ is a splitting field for $f$ over $F$. Consequently, if $K$ is a splitting field for $f$ over $F$, then $[K : F] = n$.
2. If $|F| = q$, then the set of roots of $f$ is $\{a^{q^r} : r \geq 1\}$.

**Proof.** Let $K$ be a splitting field of $f$ over $F$. If $a \in K$ is a root of $f(x)$, then $F(a)$ is an $n$-dimensional extension of $F$ inside $K$. By Theorem 6.5, $F(a)$ is a Galois extension of $F$; hence, $f(x) = \min(F, a)$ splits over $F(a)$. Therefore, $F(a)$ is a splitting field of $f$ over $F$, so $K = F(a)$. This proves the first statement. For the second, we note that $\mathrm{Gal}(K/F) = \langle \sigma \rangle$, where $\sigma(c) = c^q$ for any $c \in K$, by Theorem 6.8. Each root of $f$ is then of the form $\sigma^r(a) = a^{q^r}$ by the isomorphism extension theorem, which shows that the set of roots of $f$ is $\{a^{q^r} : r \geq 1\}$. □

**Example 6.10.** Let $F = \mathbb{F}_2$ and $K = F(\alpha)$, where $\alpha$ is a root of $f(x) = x^3 + x^2 + 1$. This polynomial has no roots in $F$, as a quick calculation shows, so it is irreducible over $F$ and $[K : F] = 3$. The field $K$ is the splitting field of $f$ over $F$, and the roots of $f$ are $\alpha$, $\alpha^2$, and $\alpha^4$, by Corollary 6.9. Since $f(\alpha) = 0$, we see that $\alpha^3 = \alpha^2 + 1$, so $\alpha^4 = \alpha^3 + \alpha = \alpha^2 + \alpha + 1$. Therefore, in terms of the basis $\{1, \alpha, \alpha^2\}$ for $K/F$, the roots of $f$ are $\alpha$, $\alpha^2$, and $1 + \alpha + \alpha^2$. This shows explicitly that $F(\alpha)$ is the splitting field of $f$ over $F$.

**Example 6.11.** Let $F = \mathbb{F}_2$ and $f(x) = x^4 + x + 1$. By the derivative test, we see that $f$ has no repeated roots. The polynomial $f$ is irreducible over $F$, since $f$ has no roots in $F$ and is not divisible by the unique irreducible quadratic $x^2 + x + 1$ in $F[x]$. If $\alpha$ is a root of $f$, then $\alpha^4 = \alpha + 1$; hence, the roots of $f$ are $\alpha$, $\alpha + 1$, $\alpha^2$, and $\alpha^2 + 1$.

**Example 6.12.** Let $f(x) = x^2 + 1$. If $p$ is an odd prime, then we show that $f$ is reducible over $F = \mathbb{F}_p$ if and only if $p \equiv 1 \pmod{4}$. To prove this, if $a \in F$ is a root of $x^2 + 1$, then $a^2 = -1$, so $a$ has order $4$ in $F^*$. By Lagrange's theorem, $4$ divides $|F^*| = p - 1$, so $p \equiv 1 \pmod{4}$. Conversely, if $p \equiv 1 \pmod{4}$, then $4$ divides $p - 1$, so there is an element $a \in F^*$ of order $4$, since $F^*$ is a cyclic group of order $p - 1$. Thus, $a^4 = 1$ and $a^2 \neq 1$. This forces $a^2 = -1$, so $a$ is a root of $f$.

If $F$ is a finite field, then we have seen that every finite extension of $F$ is Galois over $F$. Hence, every extension of $F$ is separable over $F$. Every algebraic extension of $F$ is then separable over $F$, so $F$ is perfect. To note this more prominently, we record this as a corollary. We have already seen this fact in Example 4.14.

**Corollary 6.13.** Every finite field is perfect.

Given an integer $n$, Theorem 6.8 shows that there is a finite field with $p^n$ elements. For a specific $n$, how do we go about finding this field? To construct finite fields, we can use irreducible polynomials over $\mathbb{F}_p$. Note that if $f(x)$ is an irreducible polynomial of degree $n$ in $\mathbb{F}_p[x]$, then $\mathbb{F}_p[x]/(f(x))$ is a field extension of degree $n$ over $\mathbb{F}_p$; hence, it has $p^n$ elements. Conversely, if $F$ has $p^n$ elements, and if $F = \mathbb{F}_p(\alpha)$, then $\min(\mathbb{F}_p, \alpha)$ is an irreducible polynomial of degree $n$. Therefore, finding finite fields is equivalent to finding irreducible polynomials in $\mathbb{F}_p[x]$. For instance, $\mathbb{Z}_2[x]/(x^2 + x + 1)$ is a field of $4$ elements, and $\mathbb{Z}_5[x]/(x^4 - 7)$ is a field of $5^4 = 625$ elements. The following proposition gives one way of searching for irreducible polynomials over $\mathbb{F}_p$.

**Proposition 6.14.** Let $n$ be a positive integer. Then $x^{p^n} - x$ factors over $\mathbb{F}_p$ into the product of all monic irreducible polynomials over $\mathbb{F}_p$ of degree a divisor of $n$.

**Proof.** Let $F$ be a field of order $p^n$. Then $F$ is the splitting field of $x^{p^n} - x$ over $\mathbb{F}_p$ by Theorem 6.5. Recall that $F$ is exactly the set of roots of $x^{p^n} - x$. Let $a \in F$, and set $m = [\mathbb{F}_p(a) : \mathbb{F}_p]$, a divisor of $[F : \mathbb{F}_p]$. The polynomial $\min(\mathbb{F}_p, a)$ divides $x^{p^n} - x$, since $a$ is a root of $x^{p^n} - x$. Conversely, if $f(x)$ is a monic irreducible polynomial over $\mathbb{F}_p$ of degree $m$, where $m$ divides $n$, let $K$ be the splitting field of $f$ over $\mathbb{F}_p$ inside some algebraic closure of $F$. If $a$ is a root of $f$ in $K$, then $K = \mathbb{F}_p(a)$ by Corollary 6.9. Therefore, $[K : \mathbb{F}_p] = m$, so $K \subseteq F$ by Theorem 6.8. Thus, $a \in F$, so $a$ is a root of $x^{p^n} - x$. Since $f$ is irreducible over $\mathbb{F}_p$, we have $f = \min(\mathbb{F}_p, a)$, so $f$ divides $x^{p^n} - x$. Since $x^{p^n} - x$ has no repeated roots, $x^{p^n} - x$ factors into distinct irreducible factors over $\mathbb{F}_p$. We have shown that the irreducible factors of $x^{p^n} - x$ are exactly the irreducible polynomials of degree a divisor of $n$; hence, the proposition is proven. □

**Example 6.15.** The monic irreducible polynomials of degree $5$ over $\mathbb{F}_2$ can be determined by factoring $x^{2^5} - x$, which we see factors as

$$
\begin{aligned}
&x^{32} - x = x(x + 1)\left(x^5 + x^3 + 1\right)\left(x^5 + x^2 + 1\right) \\
&\qquad \times \left(x^5 + x^4 + x^3 + x + 1\right)\left(x^5 + x^4 + x^2 + x + 1\right) \\
&\qquad \times \left(x^5 + x^4 + x^3 + x^2 + 1\right)\left(x^5 + x^3 + x^2 + x + 1\right).
\end{aligned}
$$

This factorization produces the six monic irreducible polynomials of degree $5$ over $\mathbb{F}_2$. Note that we only need one of these polynomials in order to construct a field with $2^5$ elements. Similarly, the monic irreducible polynomials of degree $2$, $3$, or $6$ over $\mathbb{F}_2$ can be found by factoring $x^{2^6} - x$. For example, $x^6 + x + 1$ is an irreducible factor of $x^{64} - x$, so $\mathbb{F}_2[x]/(x^6 + x + 1)$ is a field with $64$ elements. The factorization of $x^{32} - x$ and the factor $x^6 + x + 1$ of $x^{64} - x$ was found by using the computer algebra program Scientific Workplace.
