---
source: https://www.yuque.com/yangguangfanxing/zuyi8o/dl80bgzfgfdocs4d
---

# ECDSA: Elliptic Curve Signatures

> 原文链接：[https://www.yuque.com/yangguangfanxing/zuyi8o/dl80bgzfgfdocs4d](https://www.yuque.com/yangguangfanxing/zuyi8o/dl80bgzfgfdocs4d)

The [ECDSA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elliptic_Curve_Digital_Signature_Algorithm) (Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm) is a cryptographically secure **digital signature scheme**, based on the elliptic-curve cryptography ([ECC](/asymmetric-key-ciphers/elliptic-curve-cryptography-ecc)). **ECDSA** relies on the math of the **cyclic groups of elliptic curves over finite fields** and on the difficulty of the [ECDLP problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elliptic-curve_cryptography#Rationale) (elliptic-curve discrete logarithm problem). The [ECDSA sign / verify](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elliptic_Curve_Digital_Signature_Algorithm) algorithm relies on EC point multiplication and works as described below. ECDSA keys and signatures are shorter than in RSA for the same security level. A 256-bit ECDSA signature has the same security strength like 3072-bit RSA signature.

**ECDSA** uses [cryptographicelliptic curves(EC)](/asymmetric-key-ciphers/elliptic-curve-cryptography-ecc) over finite fields in the classical **Weierstrass form**. These curves are described by their **EC domain parameters**, specified by various cryptographic standards such as [SECG: SEC 2](http://www.secg.org/sec2-v2.pdf) and [Brainpool (RFC 5639)](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5639). Elliptic curves, used in cryptography, define:

-   **Generator point G**, used for scalar multiplication on the curve (multiply integer by EC point)
-   **Order** ***n*** of the subgroup of EC points, generated by **G**, which defines the length of the private keys (e.g. 256 bits)

For example, the 256-bit elliptic curve `secp256k1` has:

-   Order `n = 115792089237316195423570985008687907852837564279074904382605163141518161494337 `(prime number)
-   Generator point `G {x = 55066263022277343669578718895168534326250603453777594175500187360389116729240, y = 32670510020758816978083085130507043184471273380659243275938904335757337482424}`

## Key Generation

The **ECDSA key-pair** consists of:

-   **private key** (integer): `privKey`
-   **public key** (EC point): `pubKey = privKey * G`

The **private key** is generated as a **random integer** in the range \[0...***n***-1\]. The public key `pubKey` is a point on the elliptic curve, calculated by the EC point multiplication: `pubKey = privKey * G` (the private key, multiplied by the generator point **G**).

The public key EC point `{x, y}` can be **compressed** to just one of the coordinates + 1 bit (parity). For the `secp256k1` curve, the private key is 256-bit integer (32 bytes) and the compressed public key is 257-bit integer (\~ 33 bytes).

## ECDSA Sign

The ECDSA signing algorithm ([RFC 6979](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6979#section-3.2)) takes as input a message `msg` + a private key `privKey` and produces as output a **signature**, which consists of pair of integers `{r, s}`. The **ECDSA signing** algorithm is based on the [ElGamal signature scheme](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ElGamal_signature_scheme) and works as follows (with minor simplifications):

1.  Calculate the message **hash**, using a cryptographic hash function like SHA-256: `h = hash(msg)`
2.  Generate securely a **random** number ***k*** in the range

-   In case of **deterministic-ECDSA**, the value ***k*** is HMAC-derived from ***h*** + ***privKey*** (see [RFC 6979](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6979#section-3.2))

1.  Calculate the random point `R = k * G` and take its x-coordinate: `r = R.x`
2.  Calculate the signature proof:

-   The modular inverse is an integer, such that

1.  Return the **signature** `{r, s}`.

The calculated **signature** `{r, s}` is a pair of integers, each in the range . It encodes the random point `R = k * G`, along with a proof `s`, confirming that the signer knows the message `h` and the private key `privKey`. The proof `s` is by idea verifiable using the corresponding `pubKey`.

**ECDSA signatures** are **2 times longer** than the signer's **private key** for the curve used during the signing process. For example, for 256-bit elliptic curves (like `secp256k1`) the ECDSA signature is 512 bits (64 bytes) and for 521-bit curves (like `secp521r1`) the signature is 1042 bits.

## ECDSA Verify Signature

The algorithm to **verify a ECDSA signature** takes as input the signed message `msg` + the signature `{r, s}` produced from the signing algorithm + the public key `pubKey`, corresponding to the signer's private key. The output is boolean value: `valid` or `invalid` signature. The **ECDSA signature verify** algorithm works as follows (with minor simplifications):

1.  Calculate the message **hash**, with the same cryptographic hash function used during the signing: `h = hash(msg)`
2.  Calculate the modular inverse of the signature proof:
3.  Recover the random point used during the signing: `R' = (h * s1) * G + (r * s1) * pubKey`
4.  Take from ***R'*** its x-coordinate: `r' = R'.x`
5.  Calculate the signature validation **result** by comparing whether `r' == r`

The general idea of the signature verification is to **recover the point** ***R'*** using the public key and check whether it is same point ***R***, generated randomly during the signing process.

## How Does it Work?

The **ECDSA signature** `{r, s}` has the following simple explanation:

-   The signing `signing` encodes a random point ***R*** (represented by its x-coordinate only) through elliptic-curve transformations using the private key `privKey` and the message hash `h` into a number `s`, which is the **proof** that the message signer knows the private key `privKey`. The signature `{r, s}` cannot reveal the private key due to the difficulty of the **ECDLP problem**.
-   The **signature verification** decodes the proof number `s` from the signature back to its original point ***R***, using the public key `pubKey` and the message hash `h` and compares the x-coordinate of the recovered ***R*** with the ***r*** value from the signature.

## The Math behind the ECDSA Sign / Verify

Read this section **only if you like math**. Most developer may skip it.

How does the above sign / verify scheme work? It is not obvious, but let's play a bit with the equations.

The equation behind the recovering of the point ***R'***, calculated during the **signature verification**, can be transformed by replacing the `pubKey` with `privKey * G` as follows:

***R'*** =

=

=

If we take the number ***s*** = **,** calculated during the signing process, we can calculate ***s1*** =

like this:

***s1*** =

=

=

Now, replace ***s1*** in the point ***R'***.

***R'*** =

=

=

The final step is to **compare** the **point** ***R'*** (decoded by the `pubKey`) with the **point** ***R*** (encoded by the `privKey`). The algorithm in fact compares only the x-coordinates of ***R'*** and ***R***: the integers ***r'*** and ***r***.

It is expected that `r' == r` if the signature is **valid** and `r' ≠ r` if the signature or the message or the public key is incorrect.

## ECDSA: Public Key Recovery from Signature

It is important to know that the **ECDSA signature scheme** allows the **public key to be recovered** from the signed **message** together with the **signature**. The recovery process is based on some **mathematical computations** (described in the [SECG: SEC 1](http://www.secg.org/sec1-v2.pdf) standard) and returns 0, 1 or 2 possible EC points that are valid **public keys**, corresponding to the signature. To avoid this ambiguity, some ECDSA implementations add one additional bit `v` to the signature during the signing process and it takes the form `{r, s, v}`. From this extended ECDSA signature `{r, s, v}` + the signed `message`, the signer's public key can be restored with confidence.

The **public key recovery from the ECDSA signature** is very useful in bandwidth constrained or storage constrained environments (such as blockchain systems), when transmission or storage of the public keys cannot be afforded. For example, the Ethereum blockchain uses extended signatures `{r, s, v}` for the signed transactions on the chain to save storage and bandwidth.

Public key recovery is possible for signatures, based on the **ElGamal signature scheme** (such as DSA and ECDSA).

## ECDSA: Sign / Verify - Examples

After we explained in details how the **ECDSA signature** algorithm works, now let's demonstrate it in practice with **code examples**.

In this example, we shall use the `pycoin` Python package, which implements the **ECDSA signature algorithm** with the curve `secp256k1` (used in the Bitcoin cryptography), as well as many other functionalities related to the Bitcoin blockchain:

``` bash
pip install pycoin
```

### ECDSA Sign / Verify using the secp256k1 Curve and SHA3-256

First, define the functions for **hashing**, ECDSA **signing** and ECDSA **signature verification**:

``` python
from pycoin.ecdsa import generator_secp256k1, sign, verify
import hashlib, secrets

def sha3_256Hash(msg):
    hashBytes = hashlib.sha3_256(msg.encode("utf8")).digest()
    return int.from_bytes(hashBytes, byteorder="big")

def signECDSAsecp256k1(msg, privKey):
    msgHash = sha3_256Hash(msg)
    signature = sign(generator_secp256k1, privKey, msgHash)
    return signature

def verifyECDSAsecp256k1(msg, signature, pubKey):
    msgHash = sha3_256Hash(msg)
    valid = verify(generator_secp256k1, pubKey, msgHash, signature)
    return valid
```

The hashing function `sha3_256Hash(msg)` computes and returns a **SHA3-256** hash, represented as 256-bit integer number. It will be used in the sign / verify processes later.

The `signECDSAsecp256k1(msg, privKey)` function takes a text **message** and 256-bit `secp256k1` **private key** and calculates the ECDSA **signature** `{r, s}` and returns it as pair of 256-bit integers. The ECDSA signature, generated by the `pycoin` library by default is **deterministic**, as described in [RFC 6979](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6979).

The `verifyECDSAsecp256k1(msg, signature, pubKey)` function takes a text **message**, a ECDSA **signature** {***r***, ***s***} and a 2\*256-bit ECDSA **public key** (uncompressed) and returns whether the signature is **valid** or not.

Now let's demonstrate the above defined functions to **sign** a message and **verify** its signature:

``` python
# ECDSA sign message (using the curve secp256k1 + SHA3-256)
msg = "Message for ECDSA signing"
privKey = secrets.randbelow(generator_secp256k1.order())
signature = signECDSAsecp256k1(msg, privKey)
print("Message:", msg)
print("Private key:", hex(privKey))
print("Signature: r=" + hex(signature[0]) + ", s=" + hex(signature[1]))

# ECDSA verify signature (using the curve secp256k1 + SHA3-256)
pubKey = (generator_secp256k1 * privKey).pair()
valid = verifyECDSAsecp256k1(msg, signature, pubKey)
print("\nMessage:", msg)
print("Public key: (" + hex(pubKey[0]) + ", " + hex(pubKey[1]) + ")")
print("Signature valid?", valid)

# ECDSA verify tampered signature (using the curve secp256k1 + SHA3-256)
msg = "Tampered message"
valid = verifyECDSAsecp256k1(msg, signature, pubKey)
print("\nMessage:", msg)
print("Signature (tampered msg) valid?", valid)
```

Run the above code example: <https://repl.it/@nakov/ECDSA-sign-verify-in-Python>.

The **output** from the above code is like this:

``` bash
Message: Message for ECDSA signing
Private key: 0x79afbf7147841fca72b45a1978dd7669470ba67abbe5c220062924380c9c364b
Signature: r=0xb83380f6e1d09411ebf49afd1a95c738686bfb2b0fe2391134f4ae3d6d77b78a, s=0x6c305afcac930a3ea1721c04d8a1a979016baae011319746323a756fbaee1811
Message: Message for ECDSA signing
Public key: (0x3804a19f2437f7bba4fcfbc194379e43e514aa98073db3528ccdbdb642e240, 0x6b22d833b9a502b0e10e58aac485aa357bccd1df6ec0fa4d398908c1ac1920bc)
Signature valid? True
Message: Tampered message
Signature (tampered msg) valid? False
```

As it is visible from the above output, the random generated **secp256k1 private key** is **64 hex digits** (256 bits). After signing, the obtained signature {***r***, ***s***} consists of 2 \* 256-bit integers. The **public key**, obtained by multiplying the private key by the curve generator point, consists of 2 \* 256 bits (uncompressed). The produced ECDSA digital signature verifies correctly after signing. If the message is tampered, the signature fails to verify.

### Public Key Recovery from the ECDSA Signature

As we already know, in ECDSA it is possible to **recover the public key from signature**. Let's demonstrate this by adding the following code at the end of the previous example:

``` python
from pycoin.ecdsa import possible_public_pairs_for_signature

def recoverPubKeyFromSignature(msg, signature):
    msgHash = sha3_256Hash(msg)
    recoveredPubKeys = possible_public_pairs_for_signature(
        generator_secp256k1, msgHash, signature)
    return recoveredPubKeys

msg = "Message for ECDSA signing"
recoveredPubKeys = recoverPubKeyFromSignature(msg, signature)
print("\nMessage:", msg)
print("Signature: r=" + hex(signature[0]) + ", s=" + hex(signature[1]))
for pk in recoveredPubKeys:
    print("Recovered public key from signature: (" +
          hex(pk[0]) + ", " + hex(pk[1]) + ")")
```

Run the above code example: <https://repl.it/@nakov/ECDSA-public-key-recovery-in-Python>.

The above code recovers the all **possible EC public keys** from the ECDSA **signature** + the signed **message**, using the algorithm, described in <http://www.secg.org/sec1-v2.pdf>. Note that **multiple EC public keys** (0, 1 or 2) may match the message + signature. The expected output from the above code (together with the previous code) looks like this:

``` bash
Message: Message for ECDSA signing
Private key: 0xc374556584db050001c2c9265b546e66d3dbbe8239d17427c176d834a19638dc
Signature: r=0xd034c98af3274ad93f3c8ce944bbc17b11b6aa170c5f097ed98687fa0d93347c, s=0xa2318ceea2002caba38efbba3bf8ef8d43236a6edc33c040734d8eb2ed77f608
Message: Message for ECDSA signing
Public key: (0x10b5d9028ec828a0f9111e36f046afa5a0c677357351093426bcec10c663db7d, 0x271763c56fcd87b72d59ceaa5b9c3fd2122788fe344751a9bde373f903e5bb20)
Signature valid? True
Message: Tampered message
Signature (tampered msg) valid? False
Message: Message for ECDSA signing
Signature: r=0xd034c98af3274ad93f3c8ce944bbc17b11b6aa170c5f097ed98687fa0d93347c, s=0xa2318ceea2002caba38efbba3bf8ef8d43236a6edc33c040734d8eb2ed77f608
Recovered public key from signature: (0x1353fd26a6cb6110980cfd2bb5eca3b3cc3e08c930ad5991395dd826a250c79, 0xba6825142e230ee1fa2b406f3f9158a47ee49daca8ac47898c5fd92d805a101e)
Recovered public key from signature: (0x10b5d9028ec828a0f9111e36f046afa5a0c677357351093426bcec10c663db7d, 0x271763c56fcd87b72d59ceaa5b9c3fd2122788fe344751a9bde373f903e5bb20)
```

It is obvious that the **recovered possible public keys** are 2: one is equal to the public key, matching the signer's private key, and the other is not (it matches the math behind the public key recovery, but is not the correct one). To avoid this ambiguity, **the signature can be extended** to hold `{r, s, v}`, where `v` holds the parity of the ***y*** coordinate of the random point **R** from the ECDSA signing algorithm. This coordinate is lost, because the ECDSA signature takes just the **x** coordinate or **R**.

### Public Key Recovery from Extended ECDSA Signature

To **recover with confidence the public key** from ECDSA signature + message, we need a library that generates **extended ECDSA signatures** `{r, s, v}` and supports internally the public key recovery. Let's play with the `eth_keys` Python library:

``` bash
pip install eth_keys
```

The [eth_keys](https://github.com/ethereum/eth-keys/) is part of the Ethereum project and implements **secp256k1**-based ECC cryptography, private and public keys, ECDSA extended signatures `{r, s, v}` and Ethereum blockchain addresses. The following example demonstrates private key generation, message signing, public key recovery from signature + message and signature verification:

``` python
import eth_keys, os

# Generate the private + public key pair (using the secp256k1 curve)
signerPrivKey = eth_keys.keys.PrivateKey(os.urandom(32))
signerPubKey = signerPrivKey.public_key
print('Private key (64 hex digits):', signerPrivKey)
print('Public key (uncompressed, 128 hex digits):', signerPubKey)

# ECDSA sign message (using the curve secp256k1 + Keccak-256)
msg = b'Message for signing'
signature = signerPrivKey.sign_msg(msg)
print('Message:', msg)
print('Signature: [r = {0}, s = {1}, v = {2}]'.format(
    hex(signature.r), hex(signature.s), hex(signature.v)))

# ECDSA public key recovery from signature + verify signature
# (using the curve secp256k1 + Keccak-256 hash)
msg = b'Message for signing'
recoveredPubKey = signature.recover_public_key_from_msg(msg)
print('Recovered public key (128 hex digits):', recoveredPubKey)
print('Public key correct?', recoveredPubKey == signerPubKey)
valid = signerPubKey.verify_msg(msg, signature)
print("Signature valid?", valid)
```

Run the above code example: <https://repl.it/@nakov/ECDSA-public-key-recovery-extended-in-Python>.

The output from the above code looks like this:

``` bash
Private key (64 hex digits): 0x68abc765746a33272e47b0a96a0b4184048f70354221e04219fbc223bfe79794
Public key (uncompressed, 128 hex digits): 0x30a6dc572da312587144e7ccda1e9abd901323adebe7091bb4985e1202c2a10bc25f681b3d2e1a671438f0b125287b473c09ca345c5583cd627232b536b9ca0a
Message: b'Message for signing'
Signature: [r = 0x4cddf146c578d20a31fa6128e5d9afe6ac666e5ef5899f2767cacb56a42703cc, s = 0x3847036857aa3f077a2e142eee707e5af2653baa99b9d10764a0be3d61595dbb, v = 0x0]
Recovered public key (128 hex digits): 0x30a6dc572da312587144e7ccda1e9abd901323adebe7091bb4985e1202c2a10bc25f681b3d2e1a671438f0b125287b473c09ca345c5583cd627232b536b9ca0a
Public key correct? True
Signature valid? True
```

The **public key recovery** will always be successful, because there is no ambiguity with the **extended ECDSA signature**. The **signature verification** will be successful, unless the message, the public key or the signature is tampered. You are free to play with the above code, to change it, to tamper the signed message and to see what happens. Enjoy!
